---
eip: 0
title: Aggregation for Native Account Abstraction
description: Aggregation allows Smart Contract Accounts to share a single signature data between multiple AA transactions.
author: Yoav Weiss (@yoavw), Alex Forshtat (@forshtat), Dror Tirosh (@drortirosh), Shahaf Nacson (@shahafn)
discussions-to: https://www.google.com/
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-09-01
requires: 7560
---

## Abstract

RIP-7560 defined a native way to achieve Account Abstraction on Ethereum. However, one big limitation remains:
each transaction must carry its own `signature` or other form of validation input in order to be included.

We propose an extension to the RIP-7560 that introduces a validation frame that is shared by multiple transactions.

This addition follows the design of [ERC-4337](./eip-4337) signature aggregation and will enable
Ethereum transactions to natively support sharing validation inputs for the first time.

## Motivation

Using validation schemes that allow signature aggregation enables significant optimisations and savings on
gas for execution and transaction data cost. This is especially relevant in the context of rollups that publish data on
the Ethereum mainnet.

Another reason to support aggregation for transactions is snark aggregation.
Some signature schemes, such as the ones relying on `secp256r1`, are expensive to verify.
An aggregated zero-knowledge proof that the signatures of a large number of transactions were verified
may be cheaper to verify on-chain than verifying each of them separately.

## Specification

### Transaction version AA_TX_TYPE_AGGREGATED_SIG with aggregated signature data

A new special version of RIP-7560 Transaction called `AA_TX_TYPE_AGGREGATED_SIG` is introduced to carry
the aggregated signature data:

```

0x04 || 0x01 || rlp([chainId, transactionCount, aggregator, aggregatedSignature, aggregatedSigValidationGasLimit, accessList])

```

All on-chain computations that take place during the aggregated signature validation happen within the context
of this transaction.

### Calculation of Transaction Type AA_TX_TYPE_AGGREGATED_SIG hash

```

keccak256(0x04 || 0x01 || rlp(transaction_payload)

```

### Bundles of aggregated transactions

As aggregated transactions share their signatures, they form a set of transactions that are only valid together and in
a given order. We refer to this set of transactions as "aggregated bundle".

Upon inclusion in a block, each bundle consists of the single "Aggregator validation transaction" and an arbitrary
number of individual aggregated AA transactions.

There may be an arbitrary number of bundles in an Ethereum block, using same or different `aggregator` addresses.

### Aggregator validation transaction

The aggregator validation transaction must run before any of the transactions authorized by this `aggregator`.

If the execution of this transaction results in a revert the block is INVALID.

We define the following Solidity method and the `aggregator` of the transaction is invoked with a corresponding data:

```solidity

function validateSignatures(uint256 version, bytes[] aggregatedTransactions, bytes aggregatedSignature) external view;

```

The `aggregatedTransactions` parameter is interpreted as an array of `TransactionType4` structs.

It contains an array of all transactions within a bundle that are verified by the `aggregator`.
The transactions' individual `signature` parameters are replaced with the `signatureReplacement` as described below.

The entire amount of gas consumed by this transaction is referred to as `gasUsedByAggregator`.

### Individual transaction validity

We define the following Solidity method in the `aggregator` contract defined in the transaction:

```solidity

function validateTransactionSignature(uint256 version, bytes transaction) external view returns (bytes signatureReplacement);

```

The `transaction` parameter is interpreted as a `TransactionType4` struct.

This function is only ever executed in a view mode to the `aggregator` and it reverts if the signature validation fails.
The gas limit of this view-only frame can be set to the block gas limit.

Individual transactions are validated for the purposes of mempool propagation and block building by running the
validation steps in the following order:

* `sender` deployment frame (once per account)
* `sender` validation frame (required)
* `paymaster` validation frame (optional)
* `aggregator` individual signature validation frame (required)

When block builder is running the 'aggregator individual signature validation frame', it MUST use this frame's
return value as `signatureReplacement` and replace the `signature` transaction parameter with `signatureReplacement`
when the transaction is being included in the block.

This step allows the `aggregator` to provide any necessary context or metadata to the `sender` validation step without
having to provide the entire signature that has been verified by the `aggregator` already.

### Generating aggregated signatures

It is the block builder's job to combine an array of transaction signatures into a single aggregated signature.
Not all signature schemes have solidity implementations for aggregation, therefore not all block producers will be able
to include all kinds of aggregated transactions.

The `aggregator` contract MAY include an implementation for the aggregation by accepting the following view call:

```solidity

function aggregateSignatures(uint256 version, bytes transactions) external returns (bytes aggregatedSignature);

```

The `transactions` parameter is interpreted as an array of `TransactionType4` structs.

This call returns a value used as `aggregatedSignature` elsewhere. Aggregator MUST revert this call if it is unable to
calculate this value.

Note that the mempool MUST only include aggregated AA transactions for `aggregators` that have an implementation
of `aggregateSignatures` function.

A block builder MAY calculate this value using any alternative way.
If the aggregator does not implement `aggregateSignatures` function it is up to block builder to add
support for this `aggregator` and its signature scheme.

### Execution layer validity of a block with aggregated transactions included

The `validateAccountAbstractionTransaction` function's logic is not modified compared to RIP-7560.

On the execution layer, the block transactions validity conditions are extended as follows:

```

if type(tx) is AccountAbstractionTransaction {
    if (tx.version == AA_AGGREGATED_SIG_TX_VERSION){
            aggregatedTxs := collectTransactions(tx.transactionCount)
            aggregatedSignature := aggregateSig(aggregatedTxs)
            aggregatorInput := ABI.encodeWithSelector('validateSignatures()', aggregatedTxs, aggregatedSignature)
            gasUsedByAggregator := evm.Call(
                from: AA_ENTRY_POINT,
                to: tx.aggreagor,
                input: aggregatorInput,
                gas: config.aa_aggregated_sig_validation_gas_limit)
        else if (tx.version == AA_AGGREGATED_TX_VERSION){
            // NOTE: we subtract the share of aggregated tx signature valdiation gas used from the validation gas limit
            tx.validationGasLimit = tx.validationGasLimit - (gasUsedByAggregator / tx.transactionCount)
            validateAccountAbstractionTransaction(tx)
        }
    }
}

// note: make sure all transactions are accounted for
assert all_type_x_version_1_transactions_validated()

// note: 'aggregated signature data' transactions do not pay their own gas
// make sure no such transaction is left 'hanging' in a block without paying 'child' transactions
assert all_type_x_version_1_transactions_gas_paid_for()

```

### Passing cost savings to users via gas cost adjustments

The RIP-7560 charges the signature validation cost as part of a transaction gas usage.
It also treats transaction `signature` parameter as an arbitrary length byte arrays input. Its cost is calculated in the
same way the transaction `data` cost is calculated for previous transaction types.

With signature aggregation, however, the individual transactions no longer carry their own signature. They also share
the cost of validating the aggregated signature.

Therefore, the gas cost of the aggregated validation transaction is evenly divided by the number of transactions it
validates and is added to each aggregated transaction's gas cost.

This amount of consumed gas counts towards the `validationGasLimit` of the transaction, meaning that each
transaction's validation cost includes `gasUsedByAggregator / transactionCount`.
This value is referred to as `aggregatedValidationGasUsed`.

### Sender validation frame

The `AA_TX_TYPE_AGGREGATED_SIG` type transaction includes a parameter `transactionCount`.
This value indicates a number of transactions whose validation has been aggregated.

For AA transactions marked as "aggregated" by the `AA_TX_TYPE_AGGREGATED_SIG` type transaction,
the validation method `validateTransaction` return value is interpreted as:

```solidity

abi.encodePacked(aggregator, MAGIC_VALUE_SENDER, validBefore, validAfter)

```

The block including this transaction is only valid if the `aggregator` address returned by the `validateTransaction`
matches the `aggregator` address specified in the `AA_TX_TYPE_AGGREGATED_SIG` transaction.

### RPC methods (eth namespace)

#### `eth_aggregationFeeHistory`

We propose the RPC method `eth_aggregationFeeHistory` to be created.
This method behaves similarly to `eth_feeHistory` method used to estimate [EIP-1559](./eip-1559.md) gas fees,
but instead provides history of a per-transaction validation costs,
`aggregatedValidationGasUsed` and `builderFee`, for a given aggregator.
The values are calculated as an average across all transactions.

Value of `null` indicates there was no bundle with the given `aggregator` in the given block.

Input: `aggregator address`, `block count`

Returns:

```json
{
  "oldestBlock": "100000",
  "newestBlock": "100003",
  "aggregatedValidationGasUsed": [
    "450000",
    null,
    "400000",
    "500000"
  ],
  "builderFee": [
    "0x2386f26fc10000",
    null,
    "0x2386f26fc10000",
    "0x2386f26fc10000"
  ]
}
```

#### `eth_estimateGas`

In case an `aggregator` address is returned by the `validateTransaction` by the `sender`, relies on a
`eth_aggregationFeeHistory` logic in order to calculate sufficient `validationGasLimit` and `builderFee` values.

Returns `{validationGasLimit, callGasLimit, builderFee}` object.

#### `eth_getTransactionReceipt`

Accepts the Transaction Type `AA_TX_TYPE_AGGREGATED_SIG` hash.

This is a special kind of transaction with `from` field set to the `coinbase` and `to` field set to `aggregator`.

## Rationale

### Fixed transaction order in bundle

The `aggregator` contract maintains control over the number and order of transactions inside the "bundle".
This means that some of the strategies block builders apply in order to extract MEV from a block become
harder to do or even impossible.

However, allowing the block builder to arbitrarily reorder transactions in the block, mixing aggregated and regular
transactions, would make this RIP impractically complex while the MEV extraction was never an intended feature
in the first place.

## Backwards Compatibility

This EIP creates a new distinct version of RIP-7560 transactions and does not break backwards-compatibility with the
original specification.

Same paymasters and factories contracts can be used with signature aggregation.
Sender contracts need to opt in to signature aggregation explicitly by providing the `aggregator` address
as a returned data from the `validateTransaction` function.

## Security Considerations

### Bundle size determination

The proposed design leaves the freedom to determine the size of the "bundle" of aggregated AA transactions
to the block builder. However, accounts retain some control over the "bundle" size as well by setting the
`validationGasLimit` parameter, which may affect the minimal size of the bundle that works for this transaction.

This may create opposing forces where bundlers are occasionally incentivized to split one "bundle" into two
which pays more priority fee in total. This is somewhat mitigated by the `eth_estimateGas` relying on historic averages
to calculate the best possible `validationGasLimit` for the transaction.

### Malicious aggregators

The `aggregator` contracts are among te most trusted contracts in the entire ecosystem.
They can authorize transactions on behalf of accounts, and they can invalidate large numbers of transactions with
a simple storage change.

Both account developers and block builders should be extremely careful with the selection of `aggregotor` contracts
that they are willing to support.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
