---
rip: 7560
title: Native Account Abstraction with EOF code sections
description: A variant of RIP-7560 transactions relying on EOF Smart Contract Accounts
author:
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/rip-7560-native-account-abstraction/16664
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-09-01
requires: 7560, 3540
---

## Abstract

This proposal describes a slight variation of the Native Account Abstraction design fully described in RIP-7560.
This version's difference compared to the original proposal is in relying on features of "EVM Object Format" to
distinguish between validation and execution code sections.

## Motivation

Talking about Full Native Account Abstraction, the fundamental idea any solution has to address is a
mechanism for a Smart Contract Account to separate its validation and execution code sections.

RIP-7560 is build on the current Ethereum contract structure, and therefore has little choice but to rely
on using some higher-level abstraction.

In its current form, RIP-7560 transactions use Solidity method selectors in order to achieve this separation.

This, however, is far from ideal as this approach "leaks" the concept from a programming language widely used
in the EVM into the core design of the Ethereum protocol.

While there is no purely technical reason to disallow it and there are already instances of Solidity code
being "enshrined" in the Ethereum protocol, e.g. the validator deposit contract, such violation of abstraction levels
often lead to unnecessary technical debt and are worth avoiding if possible.

Additionally, method selectors provide very weak indication of the contract developer's decision to become a
participant in Native Account Abstraction transaction flow.
The chance of accidentally exposing a function with a colliding 4 byte
method identifier that returns a valid 4 byte magic to indicate approval is pretty low, but a malicious developer
can easily hide such a function giving it an innocent name, making it hard to spot a Native Account Abstraction entity.

This issue to some extent is also present in ERC-4337.

As an alternative, if Native Account Abstraction is to be implemented in coordination with EIP-3540,
relying on the concept of "code sections" it introduces is a superior approach.

## Specification

### Validation and PostTransaction code sections

The EOF format describes a separation of 'code' and 'data' sections,
marked with `kind_code (0x02)` and `kind_data (0x04)` kind markers.

The contract that may have a role in an Account Abstraction transaction, either as a Sender, a Paymaster or a Deployer,
has to contain a section marked with the following kind marker:

```
kind_abstraction = 0x05
```

This section is equivalent to a code section.

Its code can be executed during a regular transaction execution and has no special effects.
If it is the first code section of a contract, it can act as an entry point during regular transaction execution.

Only a single section of `kind_abstraction` is allowed in a contract.
This rule is validated during contract creation.

### Execution entry point for Account Abstraction transaction type participant entity (Sender, Paymaster and Deployer)

During a regular contract code execution, its behaviour is defined as follows by EIP-3540:
```
Execution starts at the first byte of code section 0, and pc is set to 0
```

However, if a contract is referenced in an `AA_TX_TYPE` transaction as a Sender, Paymaster or a Deployer,
execution starts at the first byte of code section with `kind_abstraction` marker, and `pc` is set to 0.

If the specified contract does not contain such a section, or is not an EOF contract, the transaction is not valid.

### Encoding inputs for different execution frames

We define the following "action" identifiers:

```
sender_deployment = 0x01
sender_validation = 0x02
paymaster_validation = 0x03
paymaster_posttx = 0x04
```

#### Sender Deployment

Inputs to the `Deployer` contract are not defined by the protocol and are controlled by the `deployerData` parameter.

The sender deployment frame MUST result in the `sender` address becoming initialized with contract code.

#### Sender Validation

Inputs to the `Sender` validation section are defined by the protocol as a packed encoding of the following data:
```
uint256 version, uint256 action, bytes32 txHash, bytes transaction
```

The sender validation frame MUST return 32 bytes `validationData` that is interpreted as:

```solidity
abi.encodePacked(MAGIC_VALUE_SENDER, validUntil, validAfter)
```

#### Paymaster Validation

Inputs to the `Paymaster` validation section are defined by the protocol as a packed encoding of the following data:
```
uint256 version, uint256 action, bytes32 txHash, bytes transaction
```

The frame must return a bytes array that is interpreted as:

```solidity
abi.encode(context, MAGIC_VALUE_PAYMASTER, validUntil, validAfter)
```

#### Sender Execution
As the beginning of actual transaction execution, this call is made to the `Sender` contract directly,
meaning it will be executed starting at the first byte of code section 0, and `pc` set to 0.

Inputs to the `Sender` contract are not defined by the protocol and are controlled by the `callData` parameter.

#### Paymaster post-transaction frame

Inputs to the `Paymaster` post-transaction are defined by the protocol as a packed encoding of the following data:
```
uint256 version, uint256 action, uint256 actualGasCost, bool success, bytes context
```

## Rationale

### ABI encoding for system frames' input and output data

Using an encoding format for data provided by the protocol itself does represent an abstraction levels violation,
it is a relatively safe and any alternative solution would require some trade-offs.

The validation section of a Smart Contract Account code needs to have full access to the majority of transaction
details in order to be able to make an informed decision about either accepting or rejecting the transaction.

A small subset of this data is available with the existing opcodes, however creating an opcode for every transaction
parameter is not feasible.

Allowing wallets to specify their own encoding for this data is also not feasible as Smart Contract Accounts must
avoid any ambiguity about the meaning of the received data.

Using a different encoding will not benefit from the fact that ABI decoding logic is already built into
Solidity programming language and ships with most of deployed smart contracts.

### Allowing regular code execution flows to access `kind_abstraction` sections

The code in a `kind_abstraction` does not have any difference
There is absolutely no difference between `kind_abstraction (0x05)` and `kind_code (0x02)` sections outside the
context of Native Account Abstraction transactions.

The `kind_abstraction` specifies an alternative starting point for a system frame execution, but after that
code from different sections can be accessed as well.

There seems to be no reason to isolate `kind_abstraction` code section in any way.

### Using `action` identifier instead of different kind markers

As an alternative, we could define multiple kind markers, for example `kind_validate (0x05)`, `kind_validate_paymaster`,
`kind_deploy_account` and `kind_paymaster_post_transaction`.

However, this approach would fill the kind markers namespace with very particular types of code sections with little
practical difference between them. This approach could also complicate creation of multi-role smart contracts,
for example a contract sharing the `Paymaster` and `Deployer` functionality.

Defining `action` field serves as a language-agnostic method selector, and in the future could be extended with
additional Account Abstraction related functionality.

## Backwards Compatibility

An EOF contract with `kind_abstraction` section is not valid according to EIP-3540 and cannot exist on-chain
before this proposal is implemented.

The introduction of `kind_abstraction` will break an assumption that a contract code can only have a single
execution starting point, which might confuse some developer tooling that relies on this assumption.

## Security Considerations

A contract with a `kind_abstraction` code section can be immediately identified as a Native Account Abstraction entity.
This is a significant improvement over ERC-4337 and RIP-7560 where entities are not explicitly marked.

As the `kind_abstraction` code section represents a generic way to authorize any action on behalf of the contract,
correct and secure implementation of this code is critical.
We expect compilers targeting EVM will play a major role in enabling and ensuring Smart Contract Accounts' security.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
