---
rip: 9999
title: A set of RIP-7560 Transaction Subtypes providing extended features for EOA improvement
description: A set of RIP-7560 Transaction Subtypes that each extend the existing functionality of Externally Owned Accounts and improve overall experience for the users
author: Yoav Weiss (@yoavw), Alex Forshtat (@forshtat), Dror Tirosh (@drortirosh), Shahaf Nacson (@shahafn)
discussions-to:
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created:
requires: 7560
---

## Abstract

Using the Gas Abstraction feature of [RIP-7560](./rip-7560.md) transactions with multiple execution frames,
but applying the same approach to transactions authorized with a signature created by an Externally Owned Account,
we define extensions to existing EOA behaviour that are consistent with a vision for the future of Account Abstraction.

## Motivation

The design work around Account Abstraction in Ethereum has started with
[EIP-86: Abstraction of transaction origin and signature](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-86)
back in 2017, however there has recently been an increased interest in implementing some sort of extension
to existing EOA functionality.
These "EOA extensions" can either be seen as a step towards "Full Native Account
Abstraction", or be evaluated on their own merit regardless of the eventual Account Abstraction design.

This proposal is intended to prevent the fragmentation and inconsistencies that may arise as a result of implementing
multiple independent standalone proposals by combining all of them into a unified design.

Here is the list of EIPs that propose adding features to EOA accounts that are addressed by this document:

* [EIP-2711: Sponsored, expiring and batch transactions](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2711)
* [EIP-3074: AUTH and AUTHCALL opcodes](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3074)
* [EIP-5003: Insert Code into EOAs with AUTHUSURP](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-5003)
* [EIP-5081: Expirable Transaction](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-5081)
* [EIP-5806: Delegate transaction](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-5806)
* [EIP-7377: Migration Transaction](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7377)
* [EIP-7553: Separated Payer Transaction](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7553)

Each one of these proposals introduces features that can benefit both existing users and potential future users of
the Ethereum blockchain in multiple ways.

However, together these proposals consist of 3 different transaction types and 3 opcodes, which is probably unsustainable. The transaction types are incompatible with each other, forcing the user to only use one.

None of these proposals supports Gas Abstraction mechanism that would be conceptually similar to "Paymasters" - smart
contracts capable of paying transaction gas, based on some on-chain validity function, but do not gain any
privileged access to sender's funds.
This is very disappointing given that the concept of "Paymasters" has being widely used in production by
[ERC-4337: Account Abstraction Using Alt Mempool](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4337)
and even
[ERC-1613: Gas Stations Network](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1613)
before that.

None of these proposals fully support validity time ranges, which enable both scheduled and expiring transactions,
adding a noticeable improvement to end-user experience with a relatively small amount of effort.

And most importantly, none of these proposals form a part of a bigger vision.
Instead, these proposals are isolated patches that can be applied in a single design iteration.
These proposals cannibalize each other's use-cases, but do not fully resolve the pain points Ethereum users are
currently suffering from, and they do not fully align with any kind of vision for a Full Native Account Abstraction.

## Specification
The aforementioned EIPs can be implemented by the following transaction subtypes:

### Shared RIP-9999 transaction payload

The required synergy of the proposed transaction subtypes is achieved by defining a shared base structure of
a transaction.
This will ensure the only differences between these subtypes are the ones strictly required
by their semantics instead of being caused by different tastes or variations in implementation details.

These are the shared parameters of any RIP-9999 transaction subtype payload:

```
  chainId,
  nonce,
  callData,
  paymasterData,
  paymasterGasLimit,
  maxPriorityFeePerGas,
  maxFeePerGas,
  validAfter,
  validUntil,
  accessList
```

### Gas-sponsored time-limited EOA transaction subtype

```
SPONSORED_EOA_SUBTYPE = x
```

This RIP-7560 transaction subtype allows ECDSA signature and nonce validation, same as the one used in all
of existing transaction types, to be applied to a transaction that can also provide `paymasterData`, `validAfter`
and `validUntil` parameters.

The transaction payload for this subtype is extended with the following fields:
```
 to
 value
 callGasLimit,
 yParity, r, s
```

This subtype extends the ability of an RIP-7560 transaction to specify a Paymaster contract, 
which accepts the gas charges, to all EOA accounts.
It also provided an EOA with an ability to explicitly specify a time range where this
transaction is valid, creating both "expiring" and "delayed" transactions.

In case the `to` field is `nil`, `callData` is treated as `initCode` for the purpose of contract creation,
enabling Gas Abstracted new smart contract deployment.



### Gas-sponsored time-limited batched execution EOA transaction subtype


```
BATCHED_EOA_SUBTYPE = x
```

This transaction subtype extends the `SPONSORED_EOA_SUBTYPE` transactions with an ability to initialize multiple
EOA calls with a single signature and a single Paymaster validation.


The transaction payload for this subtype is extended with the following fields:
```
 targets
 values
 gasLimits
 atomicity,
 yParity, r, s
```
The `targets` parameter is interpreted as an RLP encoding of `N` destination addressed.
The `values` parameter is interpreted as an RLP encoding of `N` 256-bit amounts.
The `callData` parameter is interpreted as an RLP encoding of `N` call data byte arrays.
The `gasLimits` parameter is interpreted as an RLP encoding of `N` 256-bit gas limit values.

The field `atomicity` contains an RLP encoded array of `N` elements of `byte` "atomicity" values.
Atomicity describes a behaviour in case of a top-level revert in one of the frames, and can take the following values:

* `CONTINUE_ON_REVERT = 0` - ignores the reverted execution and continues executing the batch
* `TERMINATE_ON_REVERT = 1` - stops the execution of the batch on the reverted execution without reverting previous calls in the batch. Does not execute the remainder 
* `ROLLBACK_ON_REVERT = 2` - rolls back all state changes caused by all the execution frames in current transaction

These parameters represent all the inputs necessary to perform `N` sub-transactions.


### Gas-sponsored time-limited one-time delegated EOA transaction subtype

```
DELEGATED_EOA_SUBTYPE = x
```

The transaction payload for this subtype is extended with the following fields:
```
 destination
 callGasLimit,
 yParity, r, s
```

This transaction subtype extends the `SPONSORED_EOA_SUBTYPE` transactions with an ability to execute arbitrary
contract code in the context of the EOA sender.

Note that such transaction provides a one-time signature delegating execution to the `destination` contract,
and this signature cannot be used repeatedly. The private key of the EOA will be needed to sign consequent delegations.

### Gas-sponsored time-limited reusable authorization EOA transaction subtype

```
AUTHORIZED_EOA_SUBTYPE = x
```

The transaction payload for this subtype is extended with the following fields:
```
 chainId,
 nonce,
 implementationAddress,
 callGasLimit
 bigNonce, // TBD: in this transaction we would need both nonces - account state and 2D
 validationGasLimit,
 commit, // 32 bytes hash
 yParity, r, s
```

This transaction subtype extends the `DELEGATED_EOA_SUBTYPE` transactions with an ability to authorize some
contract code to act as a Smart Contract Account and control the context of the EOA sender.

The transaction signature (`yParity`, `r`, `s`) are interpreted as an ECDSA signature on the `secp256k1` curve over
the message `keccak256(MAGIC || chainId || nonce || implementationAddress || commit)`.

The `commit` value is a hash values that the implementation will validate.
It is passed to the validation frame as part of the encoded transaction structure. 

Note that account's `nonce` is not incremented when `AUTHORIZED_EOA_SUBTYPE` transaction is executed so the same
authorization can be used unlimited number of times. In order to withdraw authorization, the account must perform
any action that will increment its nonce.

Transaction hash uniqueness is therefore guaranteed by a `bigNonce` field for the `NonceManager` contract.

The main difference between `DELEGATED_EOA_SUBTYPE` and `AUTHORIZED_EOA_SUBTYPE` is that the transaction is handled
as a full RIP-7560 Account Abstraction transaction.

The `implementationAddress` will be invoked with the `validateTransaction` frame same as a regular
Smart Contract Account would.
This allows EOAs to temporarily transfer control of their assets to a Smart Contract Account but maintain an
ability to revoke or override this authorisation.
This also allows a cheap creation of AA accounts that do not require any code deployment, if the private key
used to create the `yParity, r, s` signature does not exist.

Note that most of the transaction fields are not signed by this transaction's signature.
This means that the "implementation" contract is the entity responsible for implementing all kinds of protections,
and the EOA account that signs an authorization fully cedes control to the "implementation" until
the authorization is revoked.

For the purposes of Gas Abstraction, the `paymasterData` parameter is not signed as well,
so different Paymaster contracts can be used for subsequent authorized transactions using the same authorization.

#### Using permanent authorizations to create Smart Contract Accounts

This approach relies on the so-called "Nick's method", which includes deriving an address from some data and
a randomized signature value, without ever knowing the ECDSA private key that would be able to control this address.

Applying this approach to an `AUTHORIZED_EOA_SUBTYPE` transaction, a new account can be created,
whose address is forever bound to `implementationAddress` and `commit`,
without ever needing to deploy code for the contract.

### Gas-sponsored time-limited code injection EOA transaction subtype

```
INSERT_CODE_EOA_SUBTYPE
```

[//]: # (TODO: 7377 probably needs codeAddr/storage simply because it has no deployment frame; we can have initCode)

This transaction subtype extends the `SPONSORED_EOA_SUBTYPE` transactions with an ability to insert
contract code in the context of the EOA sender.

The transaction payload for this subtype is extended with the following fields:
```
callGasLimit,
codeAddr,
storage,
data,
value
```

[//]: # (TODO: TBD: this is copied directly from 7377 as it seems to apply well.)

Unlike standard contract deployment, a migration transaction directly specifies what code value the sender's
account should be set to.

As the first step of processing the transaction, set the sender’s code to `state[tx.codeAddr].code`.
Next, for each tuple in `storage` and the sender’s storage trie, set `storage[t.first] = t.second`.

Now instantiate an EVM call into the sender's account using the same rules as EIP-1559 and set the
transaction's origin to be `keccak256(sender)[0..20]`.

## Rationale

### Authorization as a transaction subtype instead of a family of opcodes

Both approaches have their benefits and downsides.
Here are some of the benefits of a transaction subtype approach:

* Use of `AUTH` and `AUTHCALL` opcodes only allow an unnecessarily dangerous way for EOAs to achieve Gas Abstraction.

    While technically it is possible to implement a gas relaying feature on top of EIP-3074, this approach requires
users to fully hand over control of their accounts to the gas paying "invoker" contract.
A lot can go wrong with this approach.

* Use of `AUTH` and `AUTHCALL` opcodes for Gas Abstraction introduces risks to the block building task.

    If the block builder relies on a Gas Abstraction mechanism to pay for transaction gas, it will require a protection
mechanism similar to [ERC-7562: Account Abstraction Validation Scope Rules](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7562).

    It is impossible to retrofit such mechanism into legacy transaction types.
    There is no way to check the `AUTH` signature other than by executing it, which probably means that
    there will always be a risk of the wrapper transaction reverting, leaving the relay service with a loss.

* Avoids exposing ECDSA signature and account nonces to the EVM opcodes.
    Using opcodes to verify authorization signature necessarily means that EVM becomes exposed to these details.
    There are real issues with ECDSA signatures, so abstracting cryptography details from EVM opcodes is desired.

* There is only a limited number of available opcodes across all L1 and L2 networks.

    Transaction types are also limited, however with subtypes the namespace is basically unlimited.

    This makes it easier to avoid network splits, as well as to introduce changes to authorisation behaviour if necessary.

## Backwards Compatibility

This RIP suggest creation of new RIP-7560 transaction subtypes, which by itself does not affect any existing contracts.

However, any contract that assumes that an EOA may not have any code or storage, will have its expectations broken
by any of these transaction subtypes. EOAs may be detected by performing an `ecrecover` or by accessing `tx.origin`. 

## Security Considerations

The `DELEGATED_EOA_SUBTYPE` and especially `AUTHORIZED_EOA_SUBTYPE` transactions add an ability for a contract to
assume control over an EOA. This is a very powerful tool that has serious security implications.

Wallets must make sure the users know what they are signing and what the implications for the signing will be.
Unlike other similar proposals that can rely on a fact that most wallet do not have an API to sign arbitrary data,
these transaction subtypes could potentially be signed with a regular `eth_signTransaction` API of a wallet
with RIP-7560 support.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
